src/pages/ddk/services/creating.mdx, before:

---
title: Creating a Jacdac Service
---

To create a service, please start as follows: 
- copy and edit an [existing](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac/tree/main/services)
  service specification in the [service editor](/tools/service-editor/)
- submit a pull request (PR), using the service editor
See the [service language specification](/reference/service-specification/) 
for more details about the syntax and semantics of services. 

We will use the [button service](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac/tree/main/services/button.md)
as a running example.

Once your PR has been merged, the following set of assets will be automatically created
for your service:
- a set of TypeScript definitions for your service in the file [jacdac/dist/specconstants.ts](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac/blob/main/dist/specconstants.ts), including the following
  - a definition of the service class number: `export const SRV_BUTTON = 0x1473a263`
  - enums/namespaces for all the service members, including registers, commands and events  
- a C include file ([button.h](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac/blob/main/dist/c/button.h))
- a MakeCode extension providing a service client ([pxt-jacdac/button](https://github.com/jacdac/pxt-jacdac/tree/master/button))

The other required assets that need to be created for the service include:
- a TypeScript server ([jacdac-ts/src/servers/buttonserver/ts](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-ts/blob/main/src/servers/buttonserver.ts))
- a React component based on the TypeScript server, which will support both device twins and simulators
- firmware for a server in C using [jacdac-c](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-c)
- tests for the service, written using the TypeScript test framework

We will add code generation for more assets soon.

## A TypeScript virtual server

A [server](/reference/clientserver/)
makes one or more sensors and/or actuators available to other devices on the Jacdac bus. To support simulation of a service, you must develop a **virtual server** residing in [jacdac-ts/src/servers](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-ts/blob/main/src/servers). The new service and its binding to the server must be added to the factory in [jacdac-ts/src/servers/servers.ts](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-ts/blob/main/src/servers/servers.ts).

The button service's virtual server is at [jacdac-ts/src/servers/buttonserver.ts](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-ts/blob/main/src/servers/buttonserver.ts).
It inherits from the base class `SensorServer` in
[jacdac-ts/src/servers/sensorserver.ts](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-ts/blob/main/src/servers/sensorserver.ts),
which makes use of various classes in the Jacdac object model (e.g. `JDServiceServer`, `JDRegisterServer`):

```
export class SensorServer<TReading extends PackedValues,> extends JDServiceServer {
    readonly reading: JDRegisterServer<TReading>
    readonly readingError: JDRegisterServer<TReading>
    readonly streamingSamples: JDRegisterServer<[number]>
    readonly streamingInterval: JDRegisterServer<[number]>
    readonly preferredStreamingInterval: JDRegisterServer<[number]>

```

The server uses the Jacdac object model to handle requests
for getting and setting register's values. It models hardware
using methods that can be invoked from outside, as with the button being held down or let up:

```
    async down() {
        this.reading.setValues([ButtonServer.ACTIVE_VALUE])
    }

    async up() {
        this.reading.setValues([ButtonServer.INACTIVE_VALUE])
    }
```

Such methods will be called from the React component.


## React-based component (device twin and simulator)

## Tests

[testdom/testrules](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-ts/blob/main/src/testdom/testrules.ts)

## MakeCode Client

# Firmware for server

If you need to implement a new service, we again recommend that you start with an existing service
implementation, as found in the [services directory](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-c/tree/main/services)
of the jacdac-c repo:
* [services/servo.c](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-c/tree/main/services/servo.c) has a simple example of registers
* [services/buzzer.c](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-c/tree/main/services/buzzer.c) has a simple example of how a command is handled (in `buzzer_handle_packet()`)
* [services/thermometer.c](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-c/tree/main/services/thermometer.c) is a very simple sensor
* [services/power.c](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-c/tree/main/services/power.c) is a more involved sensor (with custom registers)

Once you add a service, make sure to add its `*_init()` function to 
[services/jd_services.h](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-c/tree/main/services/jd_services.h).

The Jacdac runtime contains a set of helper functions for working with the
components of a Jacdac service: registers, commands, and events.

Commit message:

more about twin vs. simulator

src/pages/ddk/services/creating.mdx, after:

---
title: Creating a Service
---

To create a service, please start as follows: 
- copy and edit an [existing](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac/tree/main/services)
  service specification in the [service editor](/tools/service-editor/)
- submit a pull request (PR), using the service editor
See the [service language specification](/reference/service-specification/) 
for more details about the syntax and semantics of services. 

We will use the [button service](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac/tree/main/services/button.md)
as a running example.

Once your PR has been merged, the following set of assets will be automatically created
for your service:
- a set of TypeScript definitions for your service in the file [jacdac/dist/specconstants.ts](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac/blob/main/dist/specconstants.ts), including the following
  - a definition of the service class number: `export const SRV_BUTTON = 0x1473a263`
  - enums/namespaces for all the service members, including registers, commands and events  
- a C include file ([button.h](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac/blob/main/dist/c/button.h))
- a MakeCode extension providing a service client ([pxt-jacdac/button](https://github.com/jacdac/pxt-jacdac/tree/master/button))

The other required assets that need to be created for the service include:
- a TypeScript server ([jacdac-ts/src/servers/buttonserver/ts](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-ts/blob/main/src/servers/buttonserver.ts))
- a React component based on the TypeScript server, which will support both device twins and simulators
- firmware for a server in C using [jacdac-c](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-c)
- tests for the service, written using the TypeScript test framework

We will add code generation for more assets soon.

## A TypeScript virtual server

A [server](/reference/clientserver/)
makes one or more sensors and/or actuators available to other devices on the Jacdac bus. 

To support simulation of a service, you must develop a **virtual server** residing in 
[jacdac-ts/src/servers](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-ts/blob/main/src/servers). 
The new service and its binding to the server must be added to the factory in 
[jacdac-ts/src/servers/servers.ts](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-ts/blob/main/src/servers/servers.ts).

The button service's virtual server is at [jacdac-ts/src/servers/buttonserver.ts](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-ts/blob/main/src/servers/buttonserver.ts).
It inherits from the base class `SensorServer` in
[jacdac-ts/src/servers/sensorserver.ts](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-ts/blob/main/src/servers/sensorserver.ts),
which makes use of various classes in the Jacdac object model (e.g. `JDServiceServer`, `JDRegisterServer`):

```
export class SensorServer<TReading extends PackedValues,> extends JDServiceServer {
    readonly reading: JDRegisterServer<TReading>
    readonly readingError: JDRegisterServer<TReading>
    readonly streamingSamples: JDRegisterServer<[number]>
    readonly streamingInterval: JDRegisterServer<[number]>
    readonly preferredStreamingInterval: JDRegisterServer<[number]>

```

The server uses the Jacdac object model to handle requests
for getting and setting register's values. It models hardware
using methods that can be invoked from outside, as with the button being held down or let up:

```
    async down() {
        this.reading.setValues([ButtonServer.ACTIVE_VALUE])
    }

    async up() {
        this.reading.setValues([ButtonServer.INACTIVE_VALUE])
    }
```

Such methods will be called from the React component. There are many other virtual servers
available in [jacdac-ts/src/servers](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-ts/blob/main/src/servers). 
Feel free to copy one that will help you get started.

## React-based component (device twin and simulator)

Each service is represented by a React component that can be incorporated into the Jacdac
dashboard, which can be embedded in a web page. [jacdac-docs/src/components/dashboard/DashboardButton.tsx](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-docs/blob/main/src/components/dashboard/DashboardButton.tsx) is the React component
corresponding to the button service.

The React component should be designed to act as both
- a device twin of a real Jacdac device's service on the Jacdac bus; in the case of a button, this means that the twin shows the state of the button (down or up) but does not let the user interact with the twin
- a simulator (service widget) of a virtual server of a service; in the case case of a button, this means that the simulator shows the state of the button and let's the user press it (which calls the `down()` method) and release it (which calls the `up()` method)

If you inspect the code for `DashboardButton.tsx` you will see its logic
depends on whether or not a server is available.

The service widget factory for creating simulators/twins is at [jacdac-docs/src/components/dashboard/DashboardServiceWidget.tsx](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-docs/blob/main/src/components/dashboard/DashboardServiceWidget.tsx)


## Tests

[testdom/testrules](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-ts/blob/main/src/testdom/testrules.ts)

## MakeCode Client

# Firmware for server

If you need to implement a new service, we again recommend that you start with an existing service
implementation, as found in the [services directory](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-c/tree/main/services)
of the jacdac-c repo:
* [services/servo.c](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-c/tree/main/services/servo.c) has a simple example of registers
* [services/buzzer.c](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-c/tree/main/services/buzzer.c) has a simple example of how a command is handled (in `buzzer_handle_packet()`)
* [services/thermometer.c](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-c/tree/main/services/thermometer.c) is a very simple sensor
* [services/power.c](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-c/tree/main/services/power.c) is a more involved sensor (with custom registers)

Once you add a service, make sure to add its `*_init()` function to 
[services/jd_services.h](https://github.com/jacdac/jacdac-c/tree/main/services/jd_services.h).

The Jacdac runtime contains a set of helper functions for working with the
components of a Jacdac service: registers, commands, and events.
